---
title: Flow
description: "That mystical state where the whole world melts away and you are completely focussed on your tasks. How do we get more of that."
date: "January 30th, 2015"
---

Flow. That mystical state where the whole world melts away and we're 100%
focussed on what we're doing, and hours can pass in the blink of an eye.

Most of us know this feeling. We may get it occassionally or we may get it
often. Our questions for today are how can we get into Flow more often, and once
we do, how can we stay there longer?

## IDEAS

* Tell me more about Flow - reference Dan Pink, affiliate link to his book
* What kills Flow, and how can we avoid it?
  * Interruptions
* How can we get into Flow more often?
  * Getting Flow from the mundane - automation
  * Goldilocks Tasks
  * Understanding yourself - times, places, sorts of work.
* More reading

## Tell me more about Flow

I've known about Flow for a long time, but I didn't ever call it that. Some
times it'd be known as _the zone_, but mostly it was rarely spoken about. It's
worth talking about though, because it's one of the most enjoyable parts of
being a software engineer and if we can learn to master it then we can
-somethign-

When we get into a Flow state  -continue-

* Laser sharp focus and concentration
* Hours pass in minutes - pulled all nighters without really realising

## What things kill Flow?

From the conversations I've had with other software engineers about this topic,
it seems like most (or even all) developers know what it's like to be in Flow.
Some of us may also have a pretty good understanding of what it is that gets us
into Flow.

With that in mind, lets start by analyzing the things that can break us out of
flow.

### Interuptions

The number one way to break my Flow is to interrupt me.

-something about context switching-

-Pair programming exception- I think this is because you're not context
switching



## How can we get into Flow more often?

If our goal is to achieve Flow more often, we need to better understand the
circumstances that trigger flow.

### Goldilocks Tasks

Remember the story of [Goldilocks and the 3 Bears?](). In this story ...

This is the type of task that [Dan Pink]() recommends in his [book Flow](). A
task that isn't so easy for us that it's mundane, and not too difficult that
it's overly frustrating. We're looking for tasks that are *just right*.

So what does it mean for a task to be just right?

* Not mundane
* Not too difficult
* Some level of challenge to it

### Handling the mundane and extra challenging

In the last section we talked about finding tasks that are *just right* for us,
but we know it's not possible to always work on Goldilocks Tasks. Sometimes we
need to take on a challenge that's well beyond us, or more commonly work on some
mundane day-to-day tasks.

So how do we work with these other types of tasks?

If we're working on a mundane day-to-day task, the best way I've found to get
into Flow while doing it is to build a tool to automate it.

One of the [virtues of a programmer]() is to be lazy. Not _I'm not going to do any
work_ lazy, but _Why should I do this boring thing everyday when the computer
can do it for me_ kind of lazy.

Difficult - Break it up. Chunk it down into some easier to manage bits and set
your sights on tackling them one at a time.

### Know yourself

The best way to get into Flow more often is to understand what it is that gets
you into that state.

Think back to the last time you felt like you we're in Flow. Where were you,
what were you working on? Were you surrounded by people or by yourself. What
time of day was it? Were you listening to music? If so was it classical, dance,
rock?

All these things can contribute to you getting into Flow or not.

For me, I know that there are several factors that contribute to me getting into
Flow.

#### Time of day

I would describe myself as a night owl. I find I can be really tired during the
day, and then get a burst of energy around 9pm.

This is also the time that I find I get into Flow more easily. I remeber nights
where I've been programming like mad only to realise it's 4am and I should
probably be asleep.

For others though, the morning works better. I've read several times that some
of the most productive people in the world get up at 4am or 5am and spend the
first few hours getting work done. I've done this before and I have to say that
it's a pretty good feeling knowing that you've got a whole bunch of work done
while everyone else is still just waking up.

#### Being Prepared

Before I sit down to start, I find it's good to make sure that you have
everything on hand that you need so that you don't have to get up for the next
few hours.

I make sure that I've got some coffee brewed and a jug of water close by. If I
get into Flow quickly, the coffee normally goes cold before I've finished it.

#### Music

Some people like it, others don't.

In my case, music helps me shut out the world around me so that I can focus on
the task at hand. Sometimes where you need to do your work, especially an open
plan office, can be noisy. Blocking out the surrounding world can be useful.

The type of music you listen to can have different effects as well. I find that
music with lyrics can be distracting, and prefer to work to intrumental dance
music. [Aphex Twin's]() [Selected Ambient Works]() is a great album for this.

[Other's point out]() that classical music is also a good option for listening
to while coding.

#### A goal or purpose

One final thing that I find very important is having a clear goal.

It can be difficult (although not unattainable) to achieve Flow when you sit
down to _just code_ or _just write_. Better is to start with the intention of
adding a specific feature to a project, or write a chapter of a book.

Having a goal allows us to get a head start on our work. When we start with
the goal in mind, we've already started working on the problem before we even
sit down. The process of getting into Flow has started and we're free to focus
on expressing our ideas in whatever format we choose.

It also means we don't spend the first 10 to 15 minutes of our work time
deciding what to work on.

## Final thoughts

What is it that helps you get into Flow?
